Dev8D - Day 2
#############
:date: 2011-02-17 13:53
:author: Chris Stephens

Day two and the natives still haven't discovered that I wouldn't know an
LDAP server if it fell on me. My cunning ruse to hide behind two 'real'
techies and just smile and nod if anyone starts talking C++ to me seems
to be working out fine. I'm just camping in the Basecamp room this
morning; there were a couple of interesting looking sessions this
morning, but I was a wee bit late getting here and the session I wanted
to go to looked like standing room only. We've now used three different
forms of public transport in getting too and from the venue and they've
all been pretty crowded and rather slow. The bus was probably the best
of them. Mine this morning even had the obligatory business man saying
"I'm on the bus!" loudly into his mobile. Tsk, honestly, /civilised/
people now /text/ their partners/colleagues/whatever to tell them which
mode of transport they're currently enduring.

Still haven't worked out what the '8D' part of Dev8D stands for. Current
thinking is that it's the emoticon for 'whoa cool!' it has been really
nice running in to old friends and erstwhile colleagues here, and not
just the ones from our own dept who we didn't know were coming. I start
to realise that the developer community, particularly within higher
education, is more finite than it may first appear; even excluding the
smart cookies who took the Sun certification their institutions paid for
and went off to industry and dreams of avarice. Money isn't everything
you know. It can't buy happiness, and it can't buy the sort of job
satisfaction you get when someone first installs your dev system, gets
it up and running, and claps their hands with glee as they dive in to
start realising some of the ideas they had, but lacked the tools to
realise. And there's a LOT of that going on here this week; I've done it
myself several times.

The network connectivity here has been outstanding so far, though it
does seem to have hit a bit of a bottleneck at the moment (thank
goodness for offline blogging apps). I'm surprised that it has held up
as well as it has actually. There are a couple of network options for
delegates; eduroam (huzzah!) and the local wireless offering. This is
probably more than adequate to cope with most conferences, but we're
talking /developer/ conference here, and we tend to be more connected
than most folk. If you know that one of the Arduino projects being
spoken about is a moisture sensor to allow your houseplants to post to
Twitter when they need watering you'll perhaps start to get an idea of
the sheer scale of the logistical problems involved. ULU have coped
admirably, and the venue seems ideal for this sort of event. Kudos to
all those involved in the organisation, infrastucture, and running of
this event; in case no one else says it elsewhere, thank you for all
your hard work.

Lunch was, again, superb. Yesterday was 'Taste of Asia' and today, it
seems, was 'Taste of the UK', now the UK isn't noted for it's culinary
excellence, so the chefs had set themselves quite a task if they were
going to top yesterday, but all the old school favourites were there;
sausage and mash, fish and chip, garlic prawns and salmon (hang on...)
followed by apple crumble with cream (no custard??) or fresh fruit
salad. It was, without a doubt, easily up to yesterday's very high
standard. The quality of the food will be the one thing I take away from
this conference, besides, you know, all the techy stuff...

This afternoon I am going to go and hack with the little Arduino open
hardware boards. I think the object is to build a controller for an 8x8
LED matrix so that it will display scrolling message a la Time Square. A
challenge indeed, but one which I shall rise to, assuming I don't fall
into a buttery mash induced stupor in the meantime.
